Docs add async geotiff tutorial (#528)
microsoft/PlanetaryComputerDataCatalog: docs/overview/async-geotiff.md

# Reading Planetary Computer COGs with async-geotiff

> [async-geotiff](https://github.com/developmentseed/async-geotiff) is a Python Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF reader with no GDAL dependency. The core is Rust, image decoding runs in a thread pool, buffers are zero-copy, and every API is fully type-hinted. Use it when you want async I/O for pixel-level analysis without putting GDAL on the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[async-geotiff](https://github.com/developmentseed/async-geotiff) is a Python [Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF](https://cogeo.org/) reader with no GDAL dependency. The core is Rust, image decoding runs in a thread pool, buffers are zero-copy, and every API is fully type-hinted. Use it when you want async I/O for pixel-level analysis without putting GDAL on the system.
```

A companion notebook walks through every step end-to-end. [Open in Planetary Computer Hub](https://pccompute.westeurope.cloudapp.azure.com/compute/hub/user-redirect/git-pull?repo=https://github.com/microsoft/PlanetaryComputerExamples&urlpath=lab/tree/PlanetaryComputerExamples/quickstarts/async-geotiff.ipynb&branch=main)

## Install async-geotiff

```bash
uv add async-geotiff obstore planetary-computer pystac-client lonboard matplotlib
```

> `async-geotiff` is the user-facing library. `async-tiff` is the lower-level Rust core. Use it directly only if you're building library infrastructure on top.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`async-geotiff` is the high-level library for reading GeoTIFF and COG files. `async-tiff` is the lower-level Rust core for generically reading TIFF files. It shouldn't be necessary to touch for most users.
```

).items())

asset = item.assets["visual"]
```

`planetary_computer.sign_inplace` signs every asset href as the search returns.

## Build an authenticated obstore store

async-geotiff reads bytes through an [obstore](https://developmentseed.org/obstore/) store. `PlanetaryComputerCredentialProvider` handles SAS token acquisition and refresh. Give it a signed asset and it figures out the account and container and mounts the store to that single blob, so the COG is opened with an empty path below:

```python
from obstore.auth.planetary_computer import PlanetaryComputerCredentialProvider
from obstore.store import AzureStore

provider = PlanetaryComputerCredentialProvider.from_asset(asset)
store = AzureStore(credential_provider=provider)
```

Set your Planetary Computer subscription key via the `PC_SDK_SUBSCRIPTION_KEY` environment variable, or pass `subscription_key=` to the provider.

## Open the COG and inspect metadata

```python
from async_geotiff import GeoTIFF

geotiff = await GeoTIFF.open("", store=store)

print(geotiff.transform)   # affine transform
print(geotiff.crs)         # PyProj CRS
print(geotiff.nodata)
print(geotiff.overviews)   # finest → coarsest
```

> The header read is a single range request. This is the same pattern used by [obstore.](./obstore.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The header read usually fits in one or two range requests, facilitated by [obstore](./obstore.md).
```

## Pick an overview

> `geotiff.overviews` is ordered finest-to-coarsest. Index `0` is the full-resolution image. A coarser overview is the right choice for previews or zoomed-out work:

Reviewer: No, the `geotiff` itself is the full-resolution image. Index `0` of the overviews is the _finest resolution **after** the full-resolution data_.

```python
full_res = geotiff.overviews[0]
coarse = geotiff.overviews[-1]
```

## Read a window

A *window* names a rectangle of pixels in image coordinates. Reading one fetches only the COG tiles that intersect the rectangle:

```python
from async_geotiff import Window

window = Window(col_off=2048, row_off=2048, width=512, height=512)

> array = await full_res.read(window=window)

Reviewer: Nit: I'd call this `raster_array` not `array` to reflect the class name and to distinguish it from a bare numpy array.

```

> The returned `Array` has:

Reviewer: The returned class is named `RasterArray` https://developmentseed.org/async-geotiff/latest/api/raster-array/

- `array.data`: 3D NumPy array, band-first (`(bands, rows, cols)`).
- `array.mask`: boolean mask, `True` where nodata.
- `array.transform`: affine transform for the windowed region.
- `array.as_masked()`: convert to `numpy.ma.MaskedArray`.

The `visual` asset is 3-band RGB, so transpose to band-last before previewing:

```python
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

> plt.imshow(np.transpose(array.data, (1, 2, 0)))

Reviewer: In case it's clearer, this is shipped as [`reshape_as_image`](https://developmentseed.org/async-geotiff/latest/api/utils/#async_geotiff.utils.reshape_as_image) so that users don't have to remember the band ordering `(1, 2, 0)` is easy to forget or get wrong IMO

```

```{image} images/async-geotiff-window-matplotlib.png
:height: 360
:name: async-geotiff window preview
:class: no-scaled-link
```

## Visualize the scene with Lonboard

> For an interactive map view of the same Sentinel-2 item, stream its COG tiles through the Planetary Computer tiler into a [Lonboard](https://developmentseed.org/lonboard/) `BitmapTileLayer`:

Reviewer: As a note, the BitmapTileLayer uses titiler on the backend to send formatted PNG tiles, this doesn't read the COG data directly. That's fine if you'd like to point out how this integrates with the planetary computer titiler server!

In case you want an example of how to read the COG data directly through async-geotiff, you'd want to use [`RasterLayer.from_geotiff`](https://developmentseed.org/lonboard/latest/api/layers/raster-layer/#lonboard.RasterLayer.from_geotiff) which natively integrates with async-geotiff.

```python
import json
import urllib.request

from lonboard import BitmapTileLayer, Map

tilejson = json.load(urllib.request.urlopen(
    "https://planetarycomputer.microsoft.com/api/data/v1/item/tilejson.json"
    f"?collection={item.collection_id}&item={item.id}&assets=visual"
))
lon, lat, _ = tilejson["center"]
layer = BitmapTileLayer(
    data=tilejson["tiles"][0],
    min_zoom=int(tilejson["minzoom"]),
    max_zoom=int(tilejson["maxzoom"]),
    tile_size=256,
)
Map(layer, view_state={"longitude": lon, "latitude": lat, "zoom": 11})
```

```{image} images/async-geotiff-scene-lonboard.png
:height: 500
:name: async-geotiff Lonboard scene
:class: no-scaled-link
```

## Read in parallel

Each `read()` is independent. Fire many at once with `asyncio.gather` 

async-geotiff issues range requests in parallel and decodes them on the Rust thread pool:

```python
import asyncio

windows = [
    Window(c, r, 256, 256)
    for c in range(0, 2048, 256) for r in range(0, 2048, 256)
]
arrays = await asyncio.gather(
    *[full_res.read(window=w) for w in windows]
)

> ```

Reviewer: Similar to https://github.com/microsoft/PlanetaryComputerDataCatalog/pull/527#discussion_r3306853724, this isn't an ideal example to suggest to people, because we're instructing them to make entirely independent requests for each window of the file.

But this is something that `read` handles _automatically_, and it'll be faster because it can minimize the total number of requests that need to be made.

So here, a single 

```py
window = Window(0, 0, 2048, 2048)
full_res.read(window=window)
```
would be a lot better than making many independent window reads

This is the same speedup pattern the [obstore tutorial](./obstore.md) demonstrates at the raw-bytes level, one layer up the stack.

## When to use something else

> - For resampling, reprojection, or warping, hand the array to [rasterio](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For resampling, reprojection, or warping, use [rasterio](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/), either alone or in combination with async-geotiff. 
```

- For interactive visualization, see [Lonboard](https://developmentseed.org/lonboard/). 
- For the raw-bytes layer beneath async-geotiff, see [obstore](https://developmentseed.org/obstore/). 

> - For library authors building on the Rust core, drop to [async-tiff](https://github.com/developmentseed/async-tiff).

Reviewer: Python library authors who want to build on top of GeoTIFF should still be using  async-geotiff, not async-tiff. It's really only people who want generic TIFF support, and don't want to specialize their code to support _only_ GeoTIFF, who should be using async-tiff.

For an interactive map view of the same Sentinel-2 item, hand the open `GeoTIFF` to [Lonboard](https://developmentseed.org/lonboard/)'s `RasterLayer.from_geotiff()`. Lonboard streams tiles through async-geotiff directly — no separate tile server in the loop. You supply a `render_tile` callback that turns each tile's raw `RasterArray` into a PNG:

```python
import io

import numpy as np
from async_geotiff import Tile as GeoTIFFTile
from async_geotiff.utils import reshape_as_image
from lonboard import Map, RasterLayer
from lonboard.raster import EncodedImage
from PIL import Image

def render_visual_tile(tile: GeoTIFFTile) -> EncodedImage:
    masked = reshape_as_image(tile.array.as_masked())
    rgb = masked.data
    mask = masked.mask
    if mask.ndim == 0:
        alpha = np.full(rgb.shape[:2], 255, dtype=np.uint8)
    elif mask.ndim == 2:
        alpha = (~mask).astype(np.uint8) * 255
    else:
        alpha = (~mask.any(axis=-1)).astype(np.uint8) * 255
    rgba = np.concatenate([rgb, alpha[..., None]], axis=-1)
    img = Image.fromarray(rgba)
    buf = io.BytesIO()
    img.save(buf, format="PNG")
    return EncodedImage(data=buf.getvalue(), media_type="image/png")

> Map(RasterLayer.from_geotiff(geotiff, render_tile=render_visual_tile), height=800)

Reviewer: Previously the example was end-to-end, because `tilejson` loaded from a URL. Should we make this example end-to-end too? `geotiff` isn't created anywhere

print(geotiff.overviews)   # finest → coarsest
```

The header read usually fits in one or two range requests, facilitated by [obstore](./obstore.md).

## Pick a resolution

> `geotiff` itself is the full-resolution image. `geotiff.overviews` is the resolution pyramid *below* the full-resolution data, ordered finest-to-coarsest — index `0` is the finest overview, index `-1` is the coarsest. For zoomed-out previews or quick checks, read from a coarser overview; for analysis, read from `geotiff` directly:

Reviewer: Nit: `geotiff.overviews` _are_
